What we know about UN draft resolutions on the Israel-Hamas war so far

-----

The United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) has voted overwhelmingly to call for a “humanitarian truce” as the Israel-Hamas war grinds onwards, leading to the deaths of more than 1,400 Israelis and 7,000 Palestinians.
The non-binding resolution, passed on October 27, follows multiple failed attempts to pass similar language in the UN Security Council (UNSC), a body charged with issues of global peace.
The General Assembly – a larger branch of the UN that includes representatives from every member state – sent a strong signal with its landslide vote, with 120 countries voting in favour and 45 abstentions. Only 14 countries, including the US and Israel, opposed the resolution.
But efforts continue in the UNSC to craft language that can pass the 15-seat council, composed of five permanent members and 10 elected ones. Malta’s Ambassador Vanessa Frazier has said the council’s elected members plan to put together a new draft over the next few days.
The UNSC, one of the UN’s most powerful organs, can only adopt a resolution if at least nine of the 15 members vote in favour of it and no veto is used by one of the five permanent members. A shortage of favourable votes and a veto from the United States has kept UNSC resolutions from manifesting so far.
Here’s what to know about the draft resolutions that have been presented to the UN on the continuing war:



“China is no way denying Israel’s security concerns …what we oppose is that the draft attempts to establish a new narrative on the Palestinian-Israeli issue, ignoring the fact that the Palestinian Territory has been occupied for a long time” – Ambassador Zhang Jun pic.twitter.com/l2tSan7Mxs
— UN News (@UN_News_Centre) October 25, 2023

Russian draft #UNSC resolution on #Gaza and #Israel is quite cunningly designed to look like a compromise text (adapting paras from Brazil and U.S. drafts) while including one word "ceasefire" that the U.S. has explicitly rejected.
May get more votes than Russia's first effort. https://t.co/5i8RLEZN62
— Richard Gowan (@RichardGowan1) October 24, 2023
