Israel-Hamas truce deal: All that you need to know

-----

After more than six weeks of fighting that has destroyed extensive areas of Gaza and killed thousands, Israel and Palestinian armed group Hamas have agreed to a four-day truce.
Since October 7, when Hamas fighters attacked southern Israel and killed 1,200 people, the Israeli army has been relentlessly bombarding Gaza with air and ground attacks, killing more than 14,000 Palestinians, mostly women and children.
An estimated 1.7 million Palestinians have been displaced and forced by the Israeli army to flee to the southern areas of the Strip.
Here’s what you need to know about the truce deal:
The agreement was mediated by Qatar, which had been leading negotiations between Israel and Hamas, while coordinating with other regional and global powers, including the United States and Egypt.
US President Joe Biden thanked Qatar’s Emir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani and President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi of Egypt for their role in the breakthrough.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said that he had leaned on Biden to secure a better deal for Israel, and thanked the US president for his efforts.
Netanyahu also made it clear that the country was not ending its war on Gaza and that the stopping of fighting was only temporary.
The State of Qatar announces that a humanitarian pause has been agreed in Gaza#MOFAQatar pic.twitter.com/5qqjSjvt4X
— Ministry of Foreign Affairs – Qatar (@MofaQatar_EN) November 22, 2023

No. As of Wednesday morning, fighting continued between the two sides. Qatar said that the start time of the pause would be declared within 24 hours.
After weeks of hectic negotiations and multiple instances when a deal appeared on the horizon before falling apart, Netanyahu called a meeting of his cabinet on Tuesday night.
The Israeli prime minister presented the proposed deal to his ministers, and only three members of his cabinet opposed it — National Security Minister Itamar Ben-Gvir and two other members of his far-right political party.

Neither side is expected to hold back on restarting hostilities if the other breaks — or is perceived to have broken — any of the terms of the agreement.
Israel is not withdrawing its soldiers, tanks, armoured vehicles and other military infrastructure from Gaza, which it entered late in October in a ground offensive.
Israel’s parliament has 24 hours to appeal against the truce agreement with its High Court. The first exchange of captives and prisoners is expected to take place after that period, on Thursday or Friday.
James Dorsey, senior fellow at the National University of Singapore’s Middle East Institute, told Al Jazeera that Israel’s temporary truce with Hamas is just a first step in difficult negotiations ahead, with a lasting peace in Gaza still far off.
“What this [deal] tells you is how difficult things are going to be going forward. Once you get to the question of releasing Israeli military personnel held captive by Hamas these negotiations are going to become much more difficult.
“My sense is that Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu was caught in a bind. On the one hand domestic pressure – which wants the hostages released and wants them released now – and, on the other hand, US pressure to allow for a truce.”