Israeli forces kill teen in the West Bank: Palestinian officials

-----

Israeli forces have killed a Palestinian teenager during clashes in the occupied West Bank, according to Palestinian officials.
Palestinian media said the shooting on Friday came during confrontations between Israeli forces and Palestinians in a village near the town of Bethlehem.
Palestinian witnesses told the Reuters news agency that a group of young Palestinians near Bethlehem were throwing rocks at Israeli troops, who responded with tear gas and gunfire.
The Palestinian Health Ministry named the victim as 16-year-old Mustafa Sabah. He was reportedly shot in the chest.
The Israeli military said that dozens of Palestinians hurled rocks towards soldiers “who responded with riot dispersal means and shooting into the air.”
“Suspects continued to hurl rocks towards the soldiers, posing a life threat,” the army said. “The soldiers responded using live ammunition. Hits were identified.”
It said the incident was being reviewed.
Earlier, Israel’s military said it had arrested a suspected fighter and confiscated weapons in a raid in the city of Jenin that led to clashes with Palestinian fighters.
Israeli forces said they shot at suspects who hurled explosive devices at them. At least four Palestinians were injured in the violence, according to
the Palestinian news agency WAFA. Palestine TV said the forces blocked the movement of ambulances and conducted arrests before withdrawing.
In a separate incident on Thursay, Israeli forces killed a Palestinian man in the occupied West Bank.
Violence in the occupied West Bank has surged this year, with frequent Israeli military raids and attacks by Israeli settlers, as well as Palestinian attacks. More than 90 Palestinians and at least 19 Israelis and foreigners have been killed since January.
Israel captured the West Bank, along with East Jerusalem, in the 1967 Middle East war. It has since built large settlements there that are considered illegal by the international community.