‘Criminal’: Israel’s Jenin attack sparks condemnation, alarm

-----

Israel’s air raids and ground attacks on the Jenin refugee camp in the northern occupied West Bank on Monday drew condemnation from Iran, Egypt, Jordan and the Arab League and concern from the United Nations, as the death toll from the large-scale military operation continued to mount.
Here are some of the international reactions:
The Arab League’s Secretary-General Ahmed Aboul Gheit condemned the “brutal military operation”  in occupied Jenin in a tweet. He wrote: “The bombing of cities and camps by planes and the bulldozing of houses and roads is a collective punishment and revenge” that will lead to further escalations.
He also appealed to “advocates of peace” around the world to intervene and stop the “criminal operation”.
The Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs strongly condemned the Israeli attack on the city of Jenin in the occupied West Bank, calling for the intervention of international bodies to put an end to such violations.
In a statement, the ministry affirmed Egypt’s “complete rejection of the repeated Israeli attacks and incursions against Palestinian cities, resulting in innocent civilian casualties due to the use of excessive and indiscriminate force, and a flagrant violation of the provisions of international law and international legitimacy, especially the International humanitarian law that imposes clear and concise commitments.”



Iranian foreign ministry spokesperson Nasser Kanaani condemned the attack on Jenin, describing it as a “reckless crime and a prominent measure of state terrorism”, stressing that “the Zionist entity will be defeated this time as well”.
Kanani said in a press conference: “The continuing crimes of the Zionist entity have proven once again that normalisation with the Zionist entity will not stop the Zionist killing machine, nor will it deter it or affect it.”
Israel: No plan to expand operation to entire West Bank
Foreign minister Eli Cohen on Monday signalled Israel did not intend to expand its operation in Jenin to the entire occupied West Bank.
“Our goal is to focus on Jenin, and our goal is to focus only on the terrorists and their cells,” Cohen told reporters in Jerusalem
In a statement, Jordanian foreign ministry spokesperson Sinan al-Majali strongly condemned the Israeli offensive, saying the escalation “constitutes a violation of international humanitarian law and obligations of the [Israeli] occupation”.
The spokesperson called for immediate and effective action by the international community to stop the Israeli assault and provide protection for Palestinians in all occupied territories.
Oman has also criticised the recurrent Israeli attacks on Jenin and Palestinian territories.
Oman expressed its strong backing to the rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to establish their independent state on the 1967 borders in accordance with the two-state solution, relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The United Nations resident humanitarian coordinator in Palestine, Lynn Hastings, expressed alarm in a tweet as she called for access to the injured.
Alarmed by scale of Israeli forces operation in #Jenin, occupied #WestBank. Airstrikes were used in the densely populated refugee camp. Several dead and critically wounded. Access to all injured must be ensured. @ochaopt is mobilising #humanitarian partners to provide assistance
— Lynn Hastings (@LynnHastings) July 3, 2023

Ankara has strongly condemned the incursion carried out by the Israeli forces through a statement by the Turkish foreign ministry.
“We are deeply concerned that the current tension in the region could trigger a new spiral of violence following these attacks, and we reiterate our call on the Israeli authorities to act with common sense and put an end to such actions,” it said.
“We wish Allah’s mercy upon our Palestinian brothers who lost their lives in the incident, a speedy recovery to the injured and extend our condolences to the State of Palestine and its people.”
The United Arab Emirates has called for immediate cessation of all repeated and escalated campaigns carried out against the Palestinian people.
The UAE Ministry of Foreign Affairs stressed in a press statement the need for concentrated international efforts to achieve ceasefire in order to revive the peace process in the Middles East.