Israel’s war on Gaza updates: Israeli attacks kill 25 overnight in Gaza

-----

This live page is now closed. Follow along with our ongoing coverage of Israel’s war on Gaza here.
To learn more about the discontent brewing within the Biden administration over its support for Israel’s actions in Gaza, listen to this.
To learn more about the social media post by US Secretary of State Antony Blinken on Israel’s war on Gaza that has caused uproar, read this.





We will soon be closing this live page. Here’s a recap of recent developments on the 101st day of Israel’s war on Gaza:
The attacks are separate, one is in Syria and the other is in Iraq. But the Iranians issued statements claiming responsibility for both of them.
As for the attack in Erbil, they’re saying they targeted a Mossad headquarters – Mossad is the Israeli intelligence service. The Iranians claim the Israelis are responsible for the killing of an IRGC [Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps] general in Syria and also some other commanders of the regional “resistance axis”, as Iran describes its allies.
The context is very important here, given that there is already a war raging in the region. Iran has been trying as much as possible to distance itself from any kind of tension. This is the first time we have seen the Iranians going a step further, especially when they are claiming to have targeted a Mossad headquarters in Erbil.
This isn’t the first time that the Iranians are claiming to have hit what they claim to be this specific headquarters – it also happened in 2022.
Israel’s military says it has fired at “suspects” attempting to cross the border from Egypt.
It said it believed the individuals were attempting to smuggle drugs. Israel and Egypt entered a peace treaty in 1979 and together enforced a blockade on Gaza.
“Approximately 20 suspects, including several that were armed, arrived from Egyptian territory toward the area of the border with Israel,” the military said.
“Soldiers who operated in the area opened fire toward the armed individuals, and hits were identified.”
It is clear this is an escalation. Iran proxy forces in the region have been operating against Iran’s enemies.
Those proxies would claim responsibility for the attacks, either in Iraq or in Syria or elsewhere in the region. But now, the Iranian Revolutionary Guard is claiming responsibility for the attack.
This is all part of the spillover of the conflict in Gaza. Because these Iran-aligned armed groups, including the Iranian Revolutionary Guard, blame the United States for, as they say, standing as a major supporter of Israel’s war on Gaza.
They are now demanding not only to stop supporting Israel [in] its war in Gaza but the removal of all foreign troops from Iraq including coalition and US troops.
Iran’s Revolutionary Guard said that missile attacks had been launched against the “perpetrators of terrorist operations in the Islamic Republic. Particularly ISIL [ISIS]” in Syria, state media reported.
“The Guards identified and destroyed gathering places of their commanders and key elements with a series of ballistic missiles in response to the recent terrorist atrocities in Iran,” the statement said.
ISIL (ISIS) claimed responsibility for an attack in Iran’s southeastern city of Kerman earlier this month, which killed nearly 100 people.
No US facilities were affected by the missile strikes on Erbil, two US officials told Reuters.
The Fars News Agency, quoted by Reuters, says that Iran’s elite Revolutionary Guard has claimed responsibility for the attack in northern Iraq’s Erbil – in the Kurdish region of northern Iraq – which it says destroyed “the espionage headquarters of Israel’s Mossad” with ballistic missiles.
Erbil Airport stopped air traffic after the explosions were heard above the city, three Iraqi security sources told Reuters.
We’ll have more on this breaking news story as soon as we get it.
In a post on X, Israel’s military said the video shows a strike on Hezbollah operational territory near Maroun El Ras in southern Lebanon.
It added that interceptors had also been launched at several “suspicious aerial targets” in Lebanese territory in the areas of Yaroun and Rmeish in the south.
The joint statement by the World Food Programme (WFP), UNICEF, the World Health Organization and UNRWA said the quantities of aid reaching residents of the enclave “fall far short of what is needed to prevent a deadly combination of hunger, malnutrition, and disease”.
The appeal comes after a UN analysis confirmed that the entire population of Gaza is facing at least crisis levels of food insecurity.
The agencies called on Israel to use the Port of Ashdod, which is roughly 40km (35 miles) to the north of Gaza, to let in more aid. It also called on authorities to open more crossings into the enclave and let in commercial traffic.
“People in Gaza are suffering from a lack of food, water, medicines and adequate healthcare. Famine will make an already terrible situation catastrophic because sick people are more likely to succumb to starvation and starving people are more vulnerable to disease”, said WHO Director-General Tedros Ghebreyesus.
“We need unimpeded, safe access to deliver aid and a humanitarian ceasefire to prevent further death and suffering.”
The Wafa news agency has reported several Israeli attacks across the Gaza Strip.
In Miraj, in the north of Rafah, medical sources told Wafa that 11 Palestinians from the al-Siyban and Bin Jarmi families had been killed in an Israeli attack on a house. Separately, the Nasser Hospital in Khan Younis received the bodies of eight people who were killed in an Israeli attack near the headquarters of the Civil Defence in the southern city.
Four Palestinians were also killed in an Israeli attack on the Bureij refugee camp in central Gaza and two Palestinians were killed in a strike on Tal al-Hawa in Gaza City.
Medical sources told Wafa that 132 people have been killed in Israeli attacks on Gaza in the past 24 hours.





“Just another day as a Muslim MP”.
That’s how Zarah Sultana described a recent back-and-forth with UK Prime Minister Rishi Sunak and another Tory MP.
Sultana, speaking in parliament today, had called for “de-escalation in the Middle East and for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza”.
In response, Sunak “said I should ‘call on Hamas and the Houthis to de-escalate the situation'”, she wrote on X.
“This is an Islamophobic trope – as if by being Muslim, I am responsible for Hamas and the Houthis,” Sultana wrote.
She also condemned Tory MP Andrew Percy for implying she had “given a free pass to Hamas”.
This “again is an Islamophobic trope: without any grounds, suggesting I am supportive of Hamas,” she wrote.
I then made a Point of Order, highlighting what he had said. Percy replied saying he hadn't said that – you can see for yourself in the video – and that he "wouldn't engage in this silliness".
So that's x2 Islamophobic tropes + 1 gaslighting?
Just another day as a Muslim MP.…
— Zarah Sultana MP (@zarahsultana) January 15, 2024

Al Jazeera’s Gaza bureau chief has become a well-known figure around the world for his reporting and his steadfastness in continuing to work despite the immense personal suffering that he has faced in the past three months.
Israeli attacks have killed Dahdouh’s wife, two of his sons, a daughter and a grandson as well as his camerman, Al Jazeera’s Samer Abudaqa. Dahdouh himself was injured in the attack that killed Abudaqa.
“The cost is very high, but at the end of the day, we ask ourselves, ‘What is the other option?'” he told Ayman Mohyeldin with US-based NBC News in an interview. “We sit in our homes, waiting for missiles to land. Leave this job, give up this humanitarian message that we delivered? This is definitely not an option.”
Speaking about his remaining family, Dahdouh said they hardly see him.
“They got used to that, and they suffered. This is a very big sacrifice they made, and they made that sacrifice to enable me to continue my job,” he said. “So when the time comes and their blood sheds and their lives are sacrificed, I should leave them and give up this job? Never.”
Dahdouh added that journalists in Gaza feel let down at the lack of support they have received, considering the high death toll among those working in the enclave.
“Many Palestinian journalists feel that we were let down, left alone to face this massacre and this carnage and the world did not look at the bigger picture, did not really stand by us as we would have liked,” he said. “We feel that we are being killed twice: once by the bombs and once by this silence, this shy way of expressing support.”
Tania Hary, executive director at Gisha, the Legal Center for Freedom of Movement, says Israeli authorities are limiting the kinds of goods that go into the besieged coastal enclave, where they can go, the party shipping said goods and the party’s location.
Her post on X came in response to a statement by Israeli authorities claiming: “There is no limit to the amount of humanitarian aid that can be transferred to the people of Gaza”.
She adds that Israel is “not engaging in real deconfliction with humanitarian actors distributing aid”, which, all in all and “in practice”, means it is limiting the amount of aid entering the Gaza Strip.
'No limit' but after you limit the kinds of goods that go in, where they can go, who is allowed to ship them in & from where, while not engaging in real deconfliction w/humanitarian actors distributing aid, does it really matter? In practice you are limiting the amount of aid. https://t.co/gAV5TXV3x2
— Tania Hary (@taniahary) January 15, 2024

Hamas has been careful when generally communicating with the world and calculated when it talks to the Israeli public.
They hope to put more pressure on the Israeli government and bring it to the negotiating table with Egypt to secure a deal for a ceasefire or the release of more captives.
That comes as there have been protests in Tel Aviv pushing for the release of the captives and to put more pressure on the government.
What seems to be the message is if Israel does not come to the table, its relentless air strikes that continue to pound the Gaza Strip will likely kill more captives.
According to local journalists, a military raid is ongoing in Bani Naim, near Hebron, from which the two assailants suspected of carrying out an attack near Tel Aviv hail.
Local media sources told Al Jazeera that soldiers raided the home of Ahmed and Mohammed Zeidat, who they accuse of carrying out a car ramming and stabbing attack in Raanana, killing one and injuring at least 14 others.
“The army is now interrogating and searching the homes of relatives of the two young men. The army also took down measurements of the two men’s houses in preparation for their demolition at a later time,” the media sources said.
Ahmed Jibril, who heads emergency and ambulance services for the Palestine Red Crescent Society (PRCS) in Nablus, told Al Jazeera that there are injuries in various raids on other towns and cities, namely:
Speaking to Al Jazeera, Marco Forgione, the director general at The Institute of Export & International Trade, said the strikes carried out by US and UK forces on Houthi positions “haven’t prevented or stopped the Houthi attacks”.
That was underscored today by an attack on a US-flagged commercial ship in the Gulf of Aden, “which in itself was an escalation beyond the Red Sea,” he said.
“And in recent weeks, it was also the attack on a ship off the coast of India,” he said. “And last week, the Iranian forces took a ship in the Strait of Hormuz and took that into Iranian waters.
“There’s a very real risk of this escalating.”
Military spokesperson Daniel Hagari says that the families of Itay Svirsky and another unnamed captive have been informed of serious concerns for their lives.
A video released by Qassam Brigades appears to show Svirsky and fellow captive Yossi Sharabi dead after what the video said were Israeli air attacks.
Hagari, however, denied that Israel had killed Svirsky.
In a post on Telegram, the group claims the attack on Sderot and the surrounding areas, which were mostly evacuated after the war began.
Israeli media reported 14 rockets were fired from northern Gaza towards Israel with warning sirens sounding in Nir Am, Mefalsim and Sderot.
Intermittent rocket attacks from Gaza have continued throughout the more than 100 days of fighting in the enclave although they have become less common as fighting has intensified.
In its daily update, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA) again painted a grim picture of its efforts to provide services in Gaza.
To date, its premises have been impacted by fighting in 232 incidents, with 66 different UNRWA installations directly hit.
Just six out of the 22 health facilities run by the agency in Gaza remain operational.
To date, 150 UNRWA staff have been killed in Gaza, with 330 internally displaced people killed at UNRWA facilities.
The Yemeni rebel group’s military spokesperson, Yahya Sarea, said that Houthi forces had hit “an American ship in the Gulf of Aden, with a number of appropriate naval missiles, and the hit was accurate and direct”.
“All American and British ships and warships involved in the aggression against our country are considered hostile targets,” Sarea said, before adding that no future American or British attack on Yemen would go “unpunished”.
Sarea reiterated that the Houthis would “block Israeli navigation in the Arabian Sea and the Red Sea until the aggression stops and the siege on the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip is lifted”.
The Lebanon-based group said it attacked Israeli forces in Hanita, Israel. It also published a video it said showed an attack on the Yuval settlement in northern Israel.
It was not immediately clear if the video showed a new attack or a strike from yesterday on Yuval. That attack, which came after Israel said it killed four fighters crossing from Lebanon to Israel, killed a 76-year-old woman and her son.
Israel’s military, meanwhile, said it attacked military positions in southern Lebanon after launches towards Mattat, Margaliot, Adamit, Zar’it and Malkia.
Mohammed Abu al-Sheikh, the Palestinian Authority (PA) official in charge of the separation wall and settlement affairs in Qalqilya governorate, says the destruction of the houses – owned by citizens Bassam Yassin and Saleh Mustafa Abu Saleh Daoud – has rendered 14 people homeless.
“Israeli forces destroyed the homes under the pretext that they are located in Area C, even though Yassin’s house has been inhabited for 25 years and Daoud’s house has been inhabited since 2011,” he told Al Jazeera.
“Area C” is the part of the occupied West Bank that is under exclusive Israeli administrative and security control. Israeli authorities rarely issue permits for Palestinian construction in the area.
Since the Israeli war on the Gaza Strip began, Israeli authorities have issued stop-work orders for 10 houses and business installations in the governorate. They have also demolished five houses since October 7, Abu al-Sheikh said, calling it an act of collective punishment.




